  Cisco and Standards Opening the Door to Borderless Networks Networks and related network standards have come a very long way over the last few decades. Could you imagine a world without Ethernet? Or the Internet? Or wireles s? Could you imagine the not-so-distant past in whi ch your work location, user device, communications path, destina tion computer, and application/information access w ere defined by the network and not by you? In the present, imag ine not being able to collaborate across locations or across company boundaries because of mismatched networks. Flash forward and imagine not being able to take ad vantage of developing cloud computing services because of c onnection and exchange barriers between your infras tructure and the cloud—any cloud. Hard to imagine, given the connected world within which we all work, live, pla y, and learn. We owe all this accepted—even assumed—ever-ready comm unications to the development, definition, adoption, certification, and deployment of standards-based ne tworking technology. Standards: Ensuring Flexibility, Establishing Basel ine Functionality Although standards are at work everywhere in our ne tworks, we mostly take them for granted. Network op erators assume that standardized systems will always just “ plug and play.” The fact is that a lot of work with in technical committees and engineering labs and testing facilit ies is involved in achieving that plug-and-play sta tus. All this work has paid off nicely, though. Think of the last time you plugged into an Ethernet wire and could not ge t connectivity. Think of the last time you went to the local coffee shop and could not gain access to the Internet. Fo r network managers, think of the last time you deployed a swi tch in the wiring closet or a router in your WAN an d it did not communicate readily to the network and neighboring devices. When standards are well defined, properly implemented, and effectively deployed, standards ea se networking for all: workers and administrators, partners and customers, even friends and family. For network operators and connected users, the rewa rds for standards adoption and adherence are seen i n many areas: ● Integration and testing: Standards simplify and shorten the pilot phase of networking. ● Deployment: Standards enable ready and accurate installations and upgrades. ● Operations: Standards streamline ongoing maintenance and admi nistration. ● Problem resolution: Standards speed diagnostics and reduce repair tim es. ● Availability: Standards bolster the reliability of connections and exchanges. ● Security: Standards help ensure the integrity of connection s and connected resources. ● Accessibility: Standards extend network reach and ease network u se. ● Open systems: Standards heighten technical and business flexibi lity. ● Cost savings: Standards lower capital and operating expenses. ● Choice: Standards promote vendor independence and product availability. For technology vendors and service providers, there is also a strong return for standards adoption. Ap plication of standards-based technology eases product developmen t and testing efforts, lessens support requirements; accelerates technology innovation; and, of course, reduces the costs to design, manufacture, and deliv er networking solutions. 
   So why the need for beyond-standard technologies wi thin our networks? The simple, straightforward answer is that networki ng standards provide for solid baseline functionali ty: no more, no less. Standards cover technology that is widely acc epted and implemented by many technology vendors an d service providers. Standards rarely cover leading-edge inno vation. In this connected world, networking requirements ex pand more quickly than industry standards. Network operators must respond immediately to new IT and business dem ands. Extending networking features and services be yond current standards enables the world’s networks to d eliver on their full potential by boosting performa nce, reliability, security, service intelligence, automation, and ene rgy efficiency: the list goes on and on. In addition, these vendor extensions also serve to promote technology innovation: innovation that, in turn, promotes further advancement of industry standards. Here, ve ndors such as Cisco must first prove that new innov ations are robust and deliver real returns before they can be introduced to the standards process and become acce pted by a broad coalition of vendors and customers. Since it is not uncommon for standards definition a nd validation to lag real-world requirements by 3, 5, or even 10 years, examples abound of vendor extensions proving themselves well in advance of the resulting formal standards. The availability of Cisco EtherChannel preceded the corresponding IEEE’s 802.3ad standard by almost 10 years. Cisco’s NetFlow preceded IETF IPFIX more than 10 ye ars. Cisco’s Lightweight Access Point Protocol (LWA PP) preceded IEEE’s CAPWAP by 5 years. For Power over E thernet (PoE), Cisco’s inline power technology prec eded IEEE’s 802.3af by more than 3 years. That is almost three decades of benefits accruing to network oper ators in the form of higher performance, detailed monitoring, si mplified management, and power savings—and that is o nly across four specific Cisco pre-standard extensions. The key for network operators and technology vendor s alike is to create and operate networks that best use formal standards, while taking full advantage of defacto s tandards and vendor extensions. These defacto stand ards and vendor extensions enable operators to derive the hi ghest value from the network in support of IT and, more importantly, business initiatives. For technology vendors, these extensions undoubtedl y serve as value-add within their solutions. All ve ndors mix standards and extensions within their solutions. Ho wever, these extension technologies often lay the g roundwork for formal standards to come: standards that serve to r edefine baseline functionality in networking. The Role of Vendors in the Standards Process Individual standards are generally developed jointl y by multiple technology vendors, service providers, and network operators. Interestingly, the best standards (that is, those that strongly deliver on all the benefits described earlier) often develop out of a close partnership among comp eting vendors. In its contributions to various stan dards-setting and certification efforts, Cisco is frequently alli ed with its primary competitors to the benefit of n etwork operators and the industry as a whole. Cisco recognizes the impor tance of not only establishing well-defined standar ds, but also making sure that approved standards are strongly su pported by all concerned: vendors and operators ali ke. When examining the role of technology vendors withi n the standards process, it is important to underst and that many levels of commitment and participation are pos sible. After all, most vendors will say they are co mmitted to industry standards and open systems and, appropriat ely, list standards compliance on their product dat a sheets. How does one judge the level of commitment of a ven dor to open standards? The true standards bearers d o the following: ● Commit senior-level technical staff to standards ef forts ● Function as officers (for example, chairs) and auth ors in standards-setting groups ● Sponsor public and private forums focused on standa rds adoption and promotion 
   ● Contribute their own extension technologies to new standards developments ● Allocate significant staff and systems resources to interoperability testing ● Closely collaborate with other vendors, and even co mpetitors, in advancing standards ● Actively enlist customer and partner support and pa rticipation in shaping standards ● Deliver compliant products to market in a timely fa shion It is this greater commitment by technology vendors and network operators that moves standards forward more quickly, allowing standards to deliver ever-increas ing value to networks, to IT systems, and to busine sses overall. Cisco: Commitment Leads to Contribution Leads to Cu stomer Solutions As a leader in networking, Cisco readily accepts an d functions in a lead role throughout the entire st andards process, from definition to product development to interoperability testing to customer deployment. We recognize that our customers and the industry as a whole achi eve greater returns and success when networks and n etworking devices work as one. We also recognize that the suc cess of standards and progress in the industry best results from Cisco and other contributors—partners, competitors, and customers—working together in achieving toward t his ideal. As evidence of this broad and deep influence of Cis co within the standards process, consider the follo wing: ● Cisco is a member of more than 70 world standards b odies and forums. ● Cisco employees hold more than 30 leadership positi ons (for example, board members, chairs) in IETF, IEEE, ITU, Wi-Fi Alliance, and other important stan dards organizations. ● Cisco contributions include almost 300 RFC authors and 800 RFCs (source: www.arkko.com/tools/stats/index.html). ● Cisco representation at IETF meetings is, historica lly, more than twice that of the next vendor, and t he difference increases exponentially over other vendo rs. ● Cisco received the ITU-T Commemorative Award for ou tstanding next-generation network (NGN) contributions. Although Cisco’s technical presence, working group leadership, corporate sponsorships, and industry aw ards serve to validate Cisco’s position as a true standard bea rer, the strongest evidence of Cisco’s leadership i n open industry standards runs through all of the world’s networks: service providers, enterprises, small and medium-s ized businesses, and homes. The following are a sample of important standards t hat Cisco has served to define, develop, and enhanc e across many critical networking areas. Network Connectivity: IEEE 802.3u Fast Ethernet Introduced in 1995, Fast Ethernet increased Etherne t LAN speeds from 10 Mb/s to 100 Mb/s. Cisco’s Fast Ethernet technology served as the basis for the IEEE 802.3u standard. Further Cisco contributions helped form G igabit Ethernet, 10 Gigabit Ethernet, and now 40/100 Gigab it Ethernet, making sure that Ethernet will continu e to serve as the principal connection for the vast majority of n etworking and networked devices. IP Routing (Interior): IETF Open Shortest Path Firs t and Routing Information Protocol Version 2 Open Shortest Path First (OSPF) and Routing Informa tion Protocol Version 2 (RIP v2) are dynamic routin g protocols for use within single autonomous systems, most ofte n large enterprise networks. In leading the develop ment of routing protocol standards, other technology vendor s (for example, Proteon for OSPF) drew from Cisco’s widely adopted pre-standard Interior Gateway Routing Proto col (IGRP) and Enhanced IGRP (EIGRP) technologies. 
   IP Routing (Exterior): IETF Border Gateway Protocol The Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) is the core routi ng protocol of the Internet, maintaining a table of IP networks and making routing decisions based on path, network policies, and/or rule sets. BGP allows the Interne t to function as a truly decentralized system. Cisco’s Internet G ateway Protocol (IGP) served as the basis for the B GP standard. LAN Switching: IEEE 802.3ad “EtherChannel” Developed in the early 1990s, Cisco’s EtherChannel is a link aggregation technology that allows operat ors to group several physical Ethernet links to create one logic al Ethernet link for the purpose of providing fault tolerance and bundled high-speed connections among switches, rout ers, and servers. Cisco’s EtherChannel served as th e basis for the 802.3ad standard. IP Traffic Direction: IETF Multiprotocol Label Swit ching Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) is a highly sc alable, Data Link Layer–independent delivery mechan ism that directs and carries data from one network node to t he next. Standards work commenced in 1996, and larg e-scale deployments of MPLS began in 2001. Cisco’s Tag Swit ching technology (first shipped in 1997) developed into Label Switching in collaboration with IBM Research. Label Switching then drove the final MPLS standard: a st andard that plays an ever-increasing role in both service provi der and large enterprise networks. Owing to this vi tal role MPLS plays within public and private networks, Cisco has released a number of books promoting the effective and secure use of MPLS. (See Figure 1.) Figure 1. Sample Cisco MPLS Books Traffic Management: IETF IP Multicast IP Multicast is a bandwidth-conserving technology s pecifically designed to reduce traffic by simultane ously delivering a single stream of information to potentially thous ands of corporate recipients or homes. Cisco router s were the first to implement Protocol Independent Multicast (PIM), allowing the formation of efficient distribution tr ees for transmitting multicast content. Today, the technolo gy is an IETF standard, supported by multiple vendo rs and widely deployed in large enterprises and service providers.   Network Availability: IETF Virtual Router Redundanc y Protocol The Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol (VRRP) is de signed to eliminate the single point of failure inh erent in a static routed environment. Cisco’s Hot Standby Rout er Protocol (HSRP) served as the basis for the VRRP standard. Wireless LAN: IEEE Control and Provisioning of Wire less Access Points Control and Provisioning of Wireless Access Points (CAPWAP) simplifies the configuring, monitoring, an d troubleshooting of large wireless LANs (WLANs) thro ugh consolidated control. CAPWAP also allows networ k administrators to more closely monitor and analyze WLANs. Cisco’s Lightweight Access Point Protocol (L WAPP) served as the basis for the CAPWAP standard. Wireless WAN: IEEE 802.16 WiMAX WiMAX standards are established by the IEEE 802.16 working group and WiMAX products are certified by t he WiMAX Forum. Cisco contributed primary technologies to the IEEE 802.16 standard and continues to work on the next-generation 802.16m standard. Additionally, Cis co also introduced important concepts that are now mandatory in WiMAX Forum product requirements and certification tests. Data Center Networking: American National Standards Institute T.11 Virtual Storage Area Networks Virtual storage area networks (VSANs) are logical S ANs built on a common physical fabric, easing manag ement, while also improving security and fault isolation c apabilities. Conversely, multiple switches can bund le their ports to form a single VSAN. Cisco’s VSAN technology was app roved as the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) virtual fabric standard by Technical Committee T.11. Network Security: IEEE 802.1Q Virtual LANs A virtual LAN (VLAN) is a logical group of networke d devices that communicate as if they were attached to a broadcast domain, regardless of their physical loca tion. VLANs provide for greater scalability, height ened security, and improved network management. Cisco’s Inter-Swit ch Link (ISL) preceded the 802.1Q standards and con tributed to the development and later adoption of 802.1Q. Network Power: IEEE 802.3af Power over Ethernet Power over Ethernet (PoE) technology safely transfe rs up to 15.4 watts of DC power—alongside traditiona l Ethernet traffic—to remote devices over Category 5 cable. Cis co first shipped PoE-capable switch ports in 2000 a nd laid the groundwork for the 802.3af PoE standard that was ra tified in 2003. Cisco was the first vendor to ship products based on the 802.3af standard. Network Management: IETF Internet Protocol Flow Inf ormation Export “NetFlow” Internet Protocol Flow Information Export (IPFIX) p rovides a universal mechanism for formatting and tr ansferring IP flow information between exporters (for example, ro uters and switches) and collectors (for example, ne twork management systems). Cisco’s NetFlow Version 9 was approved as the IPFIX standard in 2006. Energy Management: IEEE 802.3az Energy Efficient Et hernet Cisco was a primary sponsor of the Energy Efficient Ethernet project that became the IEEE 802.3az stan dard. Cisco continues to lead this project and also actively co ntributes to energy conservation programs within su ch key organizations as ITU-T, European Commission’s Energ y-Using Products (EuP), Japan’s Ministry of Economy, Trade, and Industry (METI), Alliance for Telecommunication s Industry Solutions (ATIS), The Green Grid, and th e U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 
   Application Hosting: Linux OS Cisco’s Application eXtension Platform (AXP) functi ons as a Linux-based server residing within a Cisco Integrated Services Router (ISR). AXP hosting saves network op erators from having to deploy dedicated servers in support of remote applications. The AXP’s Linux OS enables the use of all Linux-supported programming environment s and the ready deployment of both off-the-shelf and custom L inux applications within the Cisco ISR. Messaging and Presence: IETF Extensible Messaging a nd Presence Protocol Since the late 1990s, Jabber technologies have been synonymous with open instant messaging, presence, Extensible Markup Language (XML) routing, and realtime collaboration. Since 2001, Jabber technologist s have led the way in forming the Extensible Messaging and Pre sence Protocol (XMPP) standards. Through its acquis ition of Jabber in late 2008, Cisco has assumed a leadership role in the Jabber/XMPP developer community. Voice Communications: IETF Session Initiation Proto col The Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) is a signalin g protocol, widely used for controlling multimedia communication sessions such as voice and video calls over IP netw orks. Cisco’s contributions to SIP advancement and adoption are wide ranging. Cisco chairs multiple SIP-related wor king groups, and 11 Cisco engineers have authored 4 4 SIP documents—more than one-third of the SIP titles avai lable from the IETF. Additionally, Cisco is a found ing member and current board member of the SIP Forum. On the p roduct side, Cisco offers SIP-compliant phones, and Cisco’s latest Unified Communications Manager 5.0 served to deliver years of SIP development efforts. Video Communications: Multivendor Video Conferencin g Although formal standards-setting activities relati ng to telepresence technology are just commencing, Cisco has already established multivendor interoperability wi thin the Cisco TelePresence 3000 and 1000 systems. These Cisco endpoints are able to deliver a video stream that c an be displayed on video conferencing endpoints sup porting H.323, SIP, or Skinny Client Control Protocol (SCCP ) standards. Conversely, Cisco TelePresence systems can display video streams received from endpoints suppo rting these same standards. Hardware Components: Low Latency Dynamic Random Acc ess Memory 3 Low Latency Dynamic Random Access Memory 3 (LLDRAM3 ) provides very short random access times, higher bandwidth, lower host port pin count, and lower pow er draw when compared with other low-latency DRAM technologies. This next-generation specification wa s codeveloped by Cisco, GSI Technology, and NEC Ele ctronics and all three companies have published an intellect ual property assurance letter to stand behind their commitment to make LLDRAM3 an open technology. The technologies just described all serve as solid proof that Cisco helps move networking and the IT i ndustry forward through timely delivery of standards-compli ant solutions and continued advancement of networki ng technologies that develop into tomorrow’s standards. Standards: An Enhancement Evolution The work on standards is a continuous process. Netw ork requirements continue to advance in scale and s cope. So too must networking standards. Cisco, as it has dem onstrated throughout its history, will continue to lead the industry in offering standards-based networking solutions, w hile also extending standards in order for networks to do more and save more for operators. One final word: When discussing standards with your technology vendors, make sure they are investing t he time, energy, and resources necessary to push your networ k to new heights in performance, reliability, reach, and service intelligence using standards development and deploy ment. This is the only way for all—not just some—of t he world’s networks to succeed in delivering on all the promis e of a borderless and boundless connected world. 
   