Network Installation Guide Artisan® 810 Series
2Before You BeginBefore You Begin Make sure you installed ink cartridges and loaded paper as described on the Start Here sheet. Then follow the instructions in this guide to set up the printer for use on a network. Tip: For a video tutorial and other information about setting up a wireless network, go to: epson.com/support/wireless. Do one of the following: ■If you’re installing the printer for the first time, see “Choose Your Connection Type” on page 3. ■If you’re setting up an additional computer to use the printer on the network, follow the steps in “Install Software” on page 22.
Choose Your Connection Type 3Choose Your Connection Type Wireless To connect the printer wirelessly, see page 4. Note: If you want to print wirelessly but do not have an access point or router, see “Create an Ad-Hoc Wireless Connection” on page 15. Wired To connect the printer using an Ethernet cable, see page 21.
4Wireless Network Installation Wireless Network Installation To add the printer to your wireless networ k, you need to know the name (SSID) of your wireless network. If it has securi ty enabled, you also need to know the WEP key or WPA passphrase. Write down your network and security information in the space provided below: ■Network name (SSID): _________________________________________ ■WEP key or WPA passphrase: ____________________________________ Note: Your printer is compatible with 802.11b and 802.11g. If your router or access point supports 802.11n (Wireless N), makes sure it is set to compatibility mode to allow 802.11b and 802.11g devices to connect to it. Your printer supports the following wireless security modes: WEP, WPA, and WPA2. If you don’t know your wireless network na me (SSID), WEP key, or WPA passphrase, contact the person who set up your wireless network before you begin. If your WPA passphrase contains upperor lowercase letters, be sure to note it correctly. Connect Wirelessly Using the Setup Wizard Follow the steps below to connect to your wireless network. 1. Press the Home button, if necessary, and select Setup on the printer’s control panel. 
Wireless Network Installation 52. Press l or r and select Network Settings. 3. Select Wireless LAN Setup, then select Wireless Setup Wizard. 4. Select the name of your wireless network. (If more than 3 networks are detected, press l or r to view the rest of the list.) If your network name isn’t listed, try the following: ■Make sure that your wireless router or access point is turned on and working correctly. Press the y Back button to return to the previous screen, select Wireless Setup Wizard, then repeat step 4. ■If you still can’t find the network name in the list, your router or access point is not broadcasting its network name. Press the y Back button, then see “Connect Wirelessly Using Advanced Setup” on page 8. 
6Wireless Network Installation5. Do one of the following: ■If your wireless network doesn’t have security enabled, continue with step 8. ■If your wireless network has security enabled, continue with step 6. 6. Use the arrow buttons on the printer’s control panel to enter your WEP key or WPA passphrase. Important: WPA passphrases and WEP keys in ASCII form at are case-sensitive. Be sure to enter upperor lowercase letters as necessary. ■Press x Menu to switch between uppercase ( ABC), lowercase ( abc), or numeric/special ( 123) characters. ■Press u or d until you see the character you want. ■Press l or r to move the cursor. ■Press – to delete a character. 7. When you’re done entering your WEP key or WPA passphrase, press OK. Press the x Menu button to switch between uppercase, lowercase, or num eric/special characters. To enter a character: Press u or d to select a character. Press l or r to move the cursor. Press – to delete a character.Indicates current selection: ABC, abc, or 123.
Wireless Network Installation 78. When you see a screen like this one, verify that the settings are correct. If you need to change a setting, press y Back until you see the setting you need to change. 9. Once you have verified that your network settings are correct, press OK to save the settings and return to the Network Settings menu. 10. Press the Home button to exit the Network Settings menu. 11. Wait for the printer to connect to your wireless network (this can take up to 90 seconds). Once it’s connected, you see the WiFi icon and a signal strength indicator on the printer’s control panel. 12. Continue with “Install Software” on page 22. Note: If the printer doesn’t connect to your wire less network after 90 seconds, the WEP key or WPA passphrase may have been entered incorrectly. See “Connect Wirelessly Using the Setup Wizard” on page 4 to select your network settings again. If the printer still doesn’t connect to your wireless network, see “The printer cannot find or connect to the wireless router or access point” on page 29. Wireless connection established
8Wireless Network InstallationConnect Wirelessly Using Advanced Setup Use this setup method if your access point or router isn’t broadcasting its network name (SSID). Make sure you know the type of security your access point or router uses (WEP, WPA, or WPA2), and the key or passphrase. 1. Press the Home button, if necessary, and select Setup on the printer’s control panel. 2. Press l or r and select Network Settings. 3. Select Wireless LAN Setup, select Advanced Setup, then select Manual Wireless LAN Setup. Wireless Network Installation 94. When you see this screen, press OK. 5. Select Infrastructure Mode. 6. Select Enter SSID. 10Wireless Network Installation7. Use the arrow buttons on the printer’s control panel to enter your wireless network name (SSID). Important: Network names are case-sensitive. Be sure to enter upperor lowercase letters as necessary. ■Press x Menu to switch between uppercase ( ABC), lowercase ( abc), or numeric/special ( 123) characters. ■Press u or d until you see the character you want. ■Press l or r to move the cursor. ■Press – to delete a character. 8. When you’re done entering your wireless network name, press OK. To enter a character: Press u or d to select a character. Press l or r to move the cursor. Press – to delete a character.Press the x Menu button to switch between uppercase, lowercase, or numeric/special characters. Indicates current selection: ABC, abc, or 123.
Wireless Network Installation 119. Select the security mode that your wireless network is using. Note: If your wireless network doesn’t have security enabled, select None, then press OK. 10. Do one of the following: ■If your wireless network uses WPA as the security mode, continue with “Select WPA Security Settings” on page 12. ■If your wireless network uses WEP as the security mode, continue with “Select WEP Security Settings” on page 13. ■If your wireless network doesn’t have security enabled, continue with “Confirm Your Network Settings” on page 14. 
12Wireless Network InstallationSelect WPA Security Settings 1. Use the arrow buttons on the printer’s control panel to enter your WPA passphrase. Important: WPA passphrases are case-sensitive. Be sure to enter upperor lowercase letters as necessary. ■Press x Menu to switch between uppercase ( ABC), lowercase ( abc), or numeric/special ( 123) characters. ■Press u or d until you see the character you want. ■Press l or r to move the cursor. ■Press – to delete a character. 2. When you’re done entering the WPA passphrase, press OK. 3. Continue with “Confirm Your Network Settings” on page 14. To enter a character: Press u or d to select a character. Press l or r to move the cursor. Press – to delete a character.Press the x Menu button to switch between uppercase, lowercase, or num eric/special characters. Indicates current selection: ABC, abc, or 123.
Wireless Network Installation 13Select WEP Security Settings 1. Press u or d to select Alphanumeric if your WEP key is ASCII, or select Hexadecimal if your WEP key is in hexadecimal format. Note: If the WEP key is 5 or 13 characters, it’s ASCII. If the WEP key is 10 or 26 characters, it’s hexadecimal. 2. Use the arrow buttons on the printer’s control panel to enter your WEP key. Important: WEP keys in ASCII format are case-sensitive. Be sure to enter upperor lowercase letters as necessary. ■Press x Menu to switch between uppercase ( ABC), lowercase ( abc), or numeric/special ( 123) characters. ■Press u or d until you see the character you want. ■Press l or r to move the cursor. ■Press – to delete a character. 3. When you’re done entering the WEP key, press OK. 4. Continue with the next section. To enter a character: Press u or d to select a character. Press l or r to move the cursor. Press – to delete a character.Press the x Menu button to switch between uppercase, lowercase, or num eric/special characters. Indicates current selection: ABC, abc, or 123.
14Wireless Network InstallationConfirm Your Network Settings 1. When you see a screen like this one, verify that the settings are correct. If you need to change a setting, press y Back until you see the setting you need to change. 2. Once you have verified that your network settings are correct, press OK to save the settings and return to the Network Settings menu. 3. Press the Home button to exit the Network Settings menu. 4. Wait for the printer to connect to your wireless network (this can take up to 90 seconds). Once it’s connected, you see the WiFi icon and a signal strength indicator on the printer’s control panel. 5. Continue with “Install Software” on page 22. Note: If the printer doesn’t connect to your wi reless network after 90 seconds, the SSID, WEP key, or WPA passphrase may have been entered incorrectly. See “Connect Wirelessly Using Advanced Setup” on page 8 to select your network settings again. If the printer still doesn’t connect to your wireless network, see “The printer cannot find or connect to the wireless router or access point” on page 29. Wireless connection established
Wireless Network Installation 15Create an Ad-Hoc Wireless Connection Use this setup method if you want to print wirelessly but do not have an access point or router. Important: For Windows® users: If your computer is connected to a network with an Ethernet cable, you need to disconnect it before ins talling software. When setup is complete, reconnect your computer’s Ethernet cable. For Macintosh® users: If your computer is connected to a network with an Ethernet cable or you use a modem for Internet access, you cannot set up your printer this way. See “Connect Wirelessly Using the Setup Wizard” on page 4 or “Wired (Ethernet) Installation” on page 21 to set up your printer. 1. Press the Home button, if necessary, and select Setup on the printer’s control panel. 2. Press l or r and select Network Settings. 16Wireless Network Installation3. Select Wireless LAN Setup, select Advanced Setup, then select Manual Wireless LAN Setup. 4. When you see this screen, press OK. 5. Select Ad Hoc Mode, then select Enter SSID. Wireless Network Installation 176. Use the arrow buttons on the printer’s control panel to create a unique network name (SSID) to identify your printer. Important: Network names are case-sensitive. Be sure to enter upperor lowercase letters as necessary. ■Press x Menu to switch between uppercase ( ABC), lowercase ( abc), or numeric/special ( 123) characters. ■Press u or d until you see the character you want. ■Press l or r to move the cursor. ■Press – to delete a character. 7. Press OK to select the default channel for your Ad Hoc network. 8. Continue with the next section. To enter a character: Press u or d to select a character. Press l or r to move the cursor. Press – to delete a character.Press the x Menu button to switch between uppercase, lowercase, or numeric/special characters. Indicates current selection: ABC, abc, or 123. 
18Wireless Network InstallationChoose Security Settings 1. Select the security mode you want to use for the Ad Hoc wireless network. Note: If you don’t want to enable securi ty for your Ad Hoc network, select None, then press OK. 2. Do one of the following: ■If you selected None as the security mode, continue with “Confirm Your Settings and Connect to the Network” on page 20. ■If you selected WEP as the secu rity mode, continue with step 3. 3. Create a WEP key for the Ad Hoc network. The WEP key can be in alphanumeric (ASCII) format (rec ommended) or hexadecimal format. Note: The number of characters in your WEP key depends on the type of security mode you choose and whether it’s alph anumeric (ASCII) or hexadecimal: 4. Select Alphanumeric if your WEP key is ASCII, or select Hexadecimal if your WEP key is in hexadecimal format.Security mode Alphanumeric (ASCII) Hexadecimal WEP–64 bit 5 characters 10 characters WEP–128 bit 13 characters 26 characters 
Wireless Network Installation 195. Use the arrow buttons on the printer’s control panel to enter your WEP key. Important: WEP keys in ASCII format are case-sensitive. Be sure to enter upperor lowercase letters as necessary. ■Press x Menu to switch between uppercase ( ABC), lowercase ( abc), or numeric/special ( 123) characters. ■Press u or d until you see the character you want. ■Press l or r to move the cursor. ■Press – to delete a character. 6. When you’re done entering the WEP key, press OK. 7. Continue with the next section. To enter a character: Press u or d to select a character. Press l or r to move the cursor. Press – to delete a character.Press the x Menu button to switch between uppercase, lowercase, or num eric/special characters. Indicates current selection: ABC, abc, or 123.
20Wireless Network InstallationConfirm Your Settings a nd Connect to the Network 1. When you see a screen like this one, verify that the settings are correct. If you need to change a setting, press y Back until you see the setting you need to change. 2. Once you have verified that your network settings are correct, press OK to save the settings and return to the Network Settings menu. 3. Press the Home button to exit the Network Settings menu. 4. On your computer, connect to the wireless network name you created on page 17 (see your computer or wireless adapter’s documentation for details). 5. Continue with “Install Software” on page 22. 
Wired (Ethernet) Installation 21 Wired (Ethernet) Installation 1. Connect an Ethernet network cable to the LAN (10/100) port on your printer. 2. Connect the other end to any available LAN port on your router, access point, or hub. Note: If you’re switching from a wireless to a wired network connection, you need to disable the wireless adapter using the printer’s control panel. Press the Setup button on the printer’s control panel, select Network Settings > Wireless LAN Setup > Advanced Setup > Disable Wireless LAN. Select Yes, then press OK. 3. Continue with the next section to install software.
22Install SoftwareInstall Software Follow the steps in this section for each computer you want to use with your printer over the network. 1. Insert the printer software CD. 2.Windows Vista®: If you see the AutoPlay window, click Run SETUP.EXE. When you see the User Account Control screen, click Continue. Windows® XP: When you see the Software Installation screen, continue with step 3. Mac OS® X: Double-click the icon. 3. Click Install. 4. When you see this screen, select Install driver for network connection and click Next. Install Software 235. When you see this screen, click Next to start network setup. 6. Make sure that your printer is turned on and connected to your network. 7. When you see the Firewall Warning screen, click Next. Note: If you see a firewall alert message, click Unblock or Allow to let EpsonNet Setup continue. Do not select Ask Me Later, Keep Blocking, or Block. If you don’t allow EpsonNet Setup to continue, you will not be able to install your printer. You might need to contact y our firewall provider for assistance. 
24Install Software8. Wait while EpsonNet Setup configures your printer for the network. 9. Do one of the following: ■If you see the Installation Complete screen, continue with the instructions for finishing the installation for Windows on page 27 or Macintosh on page 28. Install Software 25■If no available printers are found on your network, see “EpsonNet Setup was unable to find my printe r on the network” on page 30. ■If EpsonNet Setup finds more than on e printer on your network, select the printer you want to configure, then click Next. When you see the Installation Complete screen, continue with “Finish the Installation” on page 27. 
26Install Software■If you are installing the printer in Ad Hoc mode and you see this screen, make sure that your computer’s wirele ss adapter is set to acquire an IP address automatically (DHCP). Then select Acquire the IP Address Automatically using DHCP (Recommended) and click Next. When you see the Installation Complete screen, continue with “Finish the Installation” on page 27. 
Finish the Installation 27Finish the Installation Follow the steps for your operating system: ■“Windows” below ■“Macintosh” on page 28 Windows 1. Print a test page, then click Finish. 2. Follow the prompts on the screen to set up your fax header, install bonus software, and finish the installation. 3. When installation is complete, restart your computer. You’re ready to scan and print. See your printed documentation and online Epson Information Center for details. 
28Finish the InstallationMacintosh 1. Click Save to install an application that allows you to access the printer’s memory cards. 2. Select where you would like in stall the application, then click Save. 3. Click Finish. 4. When you see this screen, click Add Printer. Troubleshooting 295. Follow the steps on the right side of the screen to add your EPSON TCPIP printer. Note: It may take up to 90 seconds for your computer to find the EPSON TCPIP printer on the network. 6. Follow the prompts on the screen to print a test page, install bonus software, and finish the installation. 7. When installation is complete, restart your computer. You’re ready to scan and print. See your printed documentation and online Epson Information Center for details. Troubleshooting If you have problems setting up or usin g your product on a network, check these sections for help: ■“Setup Problems” below ■“Printing Problems” on page 32 ■“Scanning Problems” on page 33 This section also explains how to print a Network Status Sheet (see page 33). Setup Problems The printer cannot find or connect to the wireless router or access point ■T ry connecting to the wireless router or access point with your computer or another device to confirm that it is working correctly. ■Make sure that the printer is within range of your router or access point. ■Avoid placing the printer near a microw ave oven, 2.4 GHz cordless phone, or large metal object such as a filing cabinet.
30Troubleshooting■Make sure there aren’t any access restrictions (such as MAC address filtering) set on the wireless router or access point. If access restrictions are set, register the printer’s MAC address on the rout er or access point. Print a Network Status Sheet (see page 33) to obtain the MAC address. Then see your router or access point’s documentation for instructions. ■If your wireless router or access point doesn’t broadcast its network name (SSID), see “Connect Wirelessly Using Advanced Setup” on page 8 for instructions on connecting to your wireless network. If your wireless router or access point has wireless security enabled, you will also need to know what kind of security it is using. ■If the printer doesn’t connect to your wireless network, the WEP key or WPA passphrase may have been entered incorrectly. See “Wireless Network Installation” on page 4 to select your network settings again. ■The printer is compatible with 802.11b an d 802.11g. If your router or access point supports 802.11n (Wireless N), makes sure that it is set to compatibility mode to allow 802.11b and 802.11g devices to connect to it. ■If your network has a firewall and you did not allow access when you installed the software, you will need to reinstall the software following the instructions on page 22. You might need to contact your firewall provider for assistance. EpsonNet Setup was unable to find my printer on the network 1. If you see a screen like this one, click OK and do one of the following: 
Troubleshooting 31■If you connected the printer wirelessly, verify that the printer is turned on and the WiFi icon appears on the printer’s control panel. Select Wi-Fi setup using the printer’s control panel, then click Next. ■If you connected the printer to your network with an Ethernet network cable, verify that the printer is turned on and connected to your network. Select Wired Network (Ethernet) setup, then click Next. ■If you created an Ad-Hoc wireless co nnection, do one of the following: ■For Windows users: If your computer is connected to a network with an Ethernet cable, disconnect it. When setup is complete, reconnect your computer’s Ethernet cable. ■For Macintosh users: If your computer is connected to a network with an Ethernet cable, you cannot set up your printer this way. See page 4 or page 21 to set up your printer. ■If you’re switching from a wireless to a wired network connection, you need to disable the wireless adapter using the printer’s control panel. Press the Setup button on the printer’s control panel, select Network Settings > Wireless LAN Setup > Advanced Setup > Disable Wireless LAN. Select Yes, then press OK. 2. Continue clicking Next until EpsonNet Setup begins to search for your printer. Then continue with step 9 on page 24. Software installation failed Make sure that the printer is connected to your network (see page 4 for wireless or page 21 for Ethernet). Then remove and re insert the CD to reinstall the printer software. Cannot communicate on a wired LAN If you’re switching from a wireless to a wired network connection, you need to disable the wireless adapter using the printer’s control panel. Press the Setup button on the printer’s control panel, select Network Settings > Wireless LAN Setup > Advanced Setup > Disable Wireless LAN. Select Yes, then press OK. The printer does not appear in the Add Printer window (Mac OS X) Make sure the printer driver was inst alled correctly and that your computer’s TCP/IP settings are configured correctly. 
32TroubleshootingCannot access a memory card over the network ■Remove the memory card from the printer. Select Setup on the printer’s control panel, then select Network Settings > File Sharing Setup > Network > Read/Write. Press OK, then press OK again to update the setting. ■For Macintosh, follow the instructions on page 28 to install an application that allows you to access the printer’s memory card slots over the network. Printing Problems Cannot print over the network ■For wireless connections, print a Networ k Status Sheet (see page 33). If the Link Status is Disconnected, make sure the wireless router or access point is turned on and the settings are correct for your wireless network. ■For wired connections, print a Network Status Sheet (see page 33) and make sure the settings are correct for your network. If the Network Status is Disconnected, try the following: ■Make sure the Ethernet cable is secu rely connected to both the printer and your router, access point, switch, or hub. ■T ry connecting to another port on your router, access point, switch, or hub. ■T ry connecting the printer to another router, access point, switch or hub. ■T ry connecting the printer to your ro uter, access point, switch, or hub with another Ethernet cable. ■When using TCP/IP, make sure the printer’s IP address is set correctly for your network. If your network does not assign IP addresses using DHCP, you need to set the IP address manually. Printing is slow or the print is cut off For wireless connections, print a Network Status Sheet (see below) and check the Signal Strength. Or check the number of bars next to the WiFi icon on the printer’s control panel. If the Signal Stre ngth is poor or you see only one or two bars, try moving the printer closer to your wireless router or access point. Avoid placing the printer next to a microwave oven, 2.4 GHz cordless phone, or large metal objects such as a filing cabinet.
Troubleshooting 33A dial-up connection dial og box appears when printing with EpsonNet Print If you use a dial-up connection for Intern et access, you will see this message every time you print. T ry connecting to the Inte rnet using a LAN connection or set your dial-up connection to dial manually (Never dial a connection). Scanning Problems Cannot find the scanner or start Epson Scan ■If network communication was interrupted while starting Epson Scan, exit Epson Scan, and restart it after a few seconds. If Epson Scan cannot restart, turn the printer off and back on, and then try restarting Epson Scan. Check the Timeout Setting in EPSON Scan Settings. For details, see the Epson Scan Help. ■If you have a firewall or Internet security software installed, the search feature in EPSON Scan Settings may not work correctly. In this case, print a Network Status Sheet (see below), open EPSON Scan Settings, select Network (if necessary), click Add, click Enter address, and enter the IP address manually. ■If you are scanning a large document at high resolution, a communication error may occur. If the scan did not complete, lower the resolution. Cannot scan using the control panel over your network ■Make sure you’ve restarted your computer after installing the software and setting up the network connection. The printer cannot detect your computer until you’ve restarted it. ■Check to make sure your computer isn’t in sleep mode. Print a Network Status Sheet 1. Press the Home button, if necessary, and select Setup. 2. Select Network Settings. 3. Select Confirm Network Settings. 4. Press the x Start button to print a network status sheet.
34Copyright NoticeCopyright Notice All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, elec tronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission of Seiko Epson Corporation. The information contained herein is designed only for use with th is Epson product. Epson is not responsible for any use of this information as applied to other equipment. Neither Seiko Epson Corporation nor its affiliates shall be liable to the purchaser of this product or third parties for damages, losses, costs, or expenses incurred by purchaser or third parties as a result of: accident, misuse, or abuse of th is product or unauthorized modifica tions, repairs, or alterations to this product, or (exclu ding the U.S.) failure to strictly comply with Seiko Epson Corporation’s operating and maintenance instructions. Seiko Epson Corporation shall not be liable for any damages or problems arising from the use of any options or any consumable products other than th ose designated as Original Epson Products or Epson Approved Products by Seiko Epson Corporation. Software License Agreements In addition to software progra m rights owned by Seiko Epson Corporation, this product also includes open-source software. See the “S oftware Notices” section in the online Epson Information Center for a list of open-source software and soft ware license terms applied to this printer. Trademarks Epson is a registered trademark and Epson Exceed Your Vision is a registered logomark of Seiko Epson Corporation. Artisan is a registered trademark of Epson America, Inc. General Notice: Other product name s used herein are for identification purposes only and may be trademarks of their respective owners. Epson disclaims any and all rights in those marks. This information is subject to change without notice. © 2009 Epson America, Inc. 5/09
CPD-27516 Printed in XXXXXX