| STANDARD SETUP GUIDE
support.starlink.com What’s In The Box Starlink Cable AC Power Cable Power Supply UnitGen 3 Router Standard Kickstand 1.5 m (4.92 ft)1.5 m (4.92 ft)15 m (49.2 ft)STANDARD KIT
3 | Find A Clear View of the Sky Your Starlink needs a clear view of the sky so it can stay connected with satellites as they move overhead. Objects that obstruct the connection between your Starlink and the satellite, such as a tree branch, pole, or roof, will cause service interruptions. Use the obstruction tool in the App to ensure you have selected a suitable mounting location. 110° 20°110° 20° support.starlink.com2 | Install the Cables Lift the kickstand and plug one end of the provided cables into your Starlink with the cable locking feature facing up. Ensure the plug is fully inserted such that the plug face is ﬂush with the surface. To remove cable, pull ﬁrmly outward as there is no release tab. Route the other end of the Starlink cable to your Router and plug it into the port number 1 indicated with the antenna symbol on the back of the router. Plug the Gen 3 Router into a power outlet using the power cable and power supply. 1 | Download the Starlink App Scan the QR code to download the Starlink App. INSTALL
support.starlink.comsupport.starlink.com1. On your device, ﬁnd and connect to the STARLINK network in your WiFi settings. 2. Once connected, a browser window will open prompting you to enter a new SSID (Network name) and password. This step is optional but recommended. 3. You are now connected! Open the Starlink App to customize additional settings, check your connection, and more.4:20 STARLINKWiFi4 | Connect and Align Starlink 5 | Connect to WiFiStep through the Starlink install process on the Starlink App. Once connected, an alert on the App will show if you need to rotate Starlink to be properly aligned. Click the alert to use the alignment tool. If you could not ﬁnd a clear ﬁeld of view from the ground level, consider installing in an elevated location, like a roof, pole, or wall. Additional mounts and accessories are available for purchase on the Starlink Shop. INSTALL
1. Open the Starlink App to check for any alerts, outages, or obstructions. 2. Check the WiFi router light. 3. Make sure everything is securely plugged in and there is no damage to hardware or cables. 4. Power cycle the router by unplugging from power and then plugging back in. 5. Factory reset the router by pushing the reset button with a paper clip.Can’t Get Online? 6. If none of these work, contact Starlink Customer Support in the app or the Support section of starlink.comTrying to connect. The light will turn solid white when setup is complete and the router is connected to the internet, or solid red if the router cannot get a connection to the internet in 20 minutes. Connected to internet. Will turn off after 1 hour. No power to router. With good connection, the light will turn off after 1 hour. Not connected to the internet. Router is in bypass mode. Will turn off after 1 hour. Factory reset required to exit bypass mode.Flashing White Light Solid White Ligh t No Light Red Light Violet Light support.starlink.comINSTALL
support.starlink.comUsing the Extra RJ45 Ports 1. Remove the RJ45 cover. 2. Plug in your own ethernet cable to port 1 or 2. Connect the other end of your cable to your wired mesh or 3rd party hardware.PORTS